# StateMachine 2.0.0

*Not released yet*

Welcome to StateMachine 2.0.0!

This version is the first to take advantage of the Python3 improvements and is a huge internal refactoring removing the deprecated features on 1.*. We hope that you enjoy it.

These release notes cover the [](#whats-new-in-20), as well as
some [backwards incompatible changes](#backwards-incompatible-changes-in-20) you'll
want to be aware of when upgrading from StateMachine 1.*.


## Python compatibility in 2.0

StateMachine 2.0 supports Python 3.7, 3.8, 3.9, 3.10, and 3.11.


## What's new in 2.0

### State names are now optional

{ref}`State` names are now by default derived from the class variable that they are assigned to. You can keep declaring explicit names, but we encourage you to only assign a name
when it is different than the one derived from its id.

```py
>>> from statemachine import StateMachine, State

>>> class SM(StateMachine):
...     pending = State(initial=True)
...     waiting_approval = State()
...     approved = State(final=True)
...
...     start = pending.to(waiting_approval)
...     approve = waiting_approval.to(approved)
...

>>> SM.pending.name
'Pending'

>>> SM.waiting_approval.name
'Waiting approval'

>>> SM.approved.name
'Approved'

```

### Added support for internal transitions

An internal transition is like a {ref}`self transition`, but in contrast, no entry or exit actions
are ever executed as a result of an internal transition.

```py
>>> from statemachine import StateMachine, State

>>> class TestStateMachine(StateMachine):
...     initial = State(initial=True)
...
...     loop = initial.to.itself(internal=True)

```

```{seealso}
See {ref}`internal transition` for more details.
```


## Minor features in 2.0

- Modernization of the development tools to use linters and improved mypy support.
- [#342](https://github.com/fgmacedo/python-statemachine/pull/342): Guards now supports the
  evaluation of **truthy** and **falsy** values.
- [#342](https://github.com/fgmacedo/python-statemachine/pull/342): Assignment of `Transition`
  guards using decorators is now possible.
- [#331](https://github.com/fgmacedo/python-statemachine/pull/331): Added a way to generate diagrams using [QuickChart.io](https://quickchart.io) instead of GraphViz. See {ref}`diagrams` for more details.
- [#353](https://github.com/fgmacedo/python-statemachine/pull/353): Support for abstract state machine classes, so you can subclass `StateMachine` to add behavior on your own base class. Abstract `StateMachine` cannot be instantiated.
- [#355](https://github.com/fgmacedo/python-statemachine/pull/355): Now is possible to trigger an event as an action by registering the event name as the callback param.

## Bugfixes in 2.0

- [#341](https://github.com/fgmacedo/python-statemachine/issues/341): Fix dynamic dispatch
  on methods with default parameters.


## Backward incompatible changes in 2.0

- Dropped support for Django <= `1.6` for auto-discovering and registering `StateMachine` classes
  to be used on {ref}`django integration`.

### Statemachine class changes in 2.0

#### `StateMachine.run` removed in favor of `StateMachine.send`

```py
from tests.examples.traffic_light_machine import TrafficLightMachine

sm = TrafficLightMachine()
sm.run("cycle")

```

Should become:

```py
>>> from tests.examples.traffic_light_machine import TrafficLightMachine

>>> sm = TrafficLightMachine()
>>> sm.send("cycle")
'Running cycle from green to yellow'

```


#### `StateMachine.allowed_transitions` removed in favor of `StateMachine.allowed_events`

```py
from tests.examples.traffic_light_machine import TrafficLightMachine

sm = TrafficLightMachine()
assert [t.name for t in sm.allowed_transitions] == ["cycle"]

```

Should become:

```py
>>> from tests.examples.traffic_light_machine import TrafficLightMachine

>>> sm = TrafficLightMachine()
>>> assert [t.name for t in sm.allowed_events] == ["cycle"]

```

#### `Statemachine.is_<state>` removed in favor of `StateMachine.<state>.is_active`

```py
from tests.examples.traffic_light_machine import TrafficLightMachine

sm = TrafficLightMachine()
assert sm.is_green

```

Should become:

```py
>>> from tests.examples.traffic_light_machine import TrafficLightMachine

>>> sm = TrafficLightMachine()
>>> assert sm.green.is_active

```

### State class changes in 2.0

#### `State.identification` removed in favor of `State.id`

```py
from tests.examples.traffic_light_machine import TrafficLightMachine

sm = TrafficLightMachine()
assert sm.current_state.identification == "green"

```

Should become:

```py
>>> from tests.examples.traffic_light_machine import TrafficLightMachine

>>> sm = TrafficLightMachine()
>>> assert sm.current_state.id == "green"

```
